Comparing Atlantic Revolutions
Despite their common political vocabulary and a broadly democratic character, the Atlantic revolutions differed substantially from one another. They were triggered by different circumstances, expressed quite different social and political tensions, and varied considerably in their outcomes. Liberty, noted Simón Bolívar, “is a succulent morsel, but one difficult to digest.”2 “Digesting liberty” occurred in quite distinct ways in the various sites of the Atlantic revolutions.
The North American Revolution, 1775–1787
Every schoolchild in the United States learns early that the American Revolution was a struggle for independence from oppressive British rule. That struggle was launched with the Declaration of Independence in 1776, resulted in an unlikely military victory by 1781, and generated a federal constitution in 1787, joining thirteen formerly separate colonies into a new nation (see Map 8.1). It was the first in a series of upheavals that rocked the Atlantic world and beyond in the century that followed. But was it a genuine revolution? What, precisely, did it change?

image pop up. Press enter to access the pop up
Map 8.1 The United States after the American Revolution

The union of the thirteen British colonies in North America created the embryonic United States, shown here in 1788. Over the past two centuries and more of anticolonial struggles, it was the only example of separate colonies joining together after independence to form a larger and enduring nation.

The following states with cities are labeled: Georgia (Savannah), South Carolina (Charleston), Virginia (Norfolk), Delaware, Maryland (Baltimore), Pennsylvania (Pittsburgh), New Jersey (Philadelphia), New York, Connecticut, Massachusetts (Boston), Rhode Island, New Hampshire (Portsmouth), and Maine (Part of Massachusetts). The Tennessee district lies in the North Carolina state and the Kentucky district lies in Virginia State. The region that lies between New York and New Hampshire is the disputed land.

 Causation
How did the organization of the colonies affect the later establishment of the United States?

 Continuity and Change
In what ways did the American Revolution transform American society, and in what ways did it not?

By effecting a break with Britain, the American Revolution marked a decisive political change, but in other ways it was, strangely enough, a conservative movement because it originated in an effort to preserve the existing liberties of the colonies rather than to create new ones. For much of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the British colonies in North America enjoyed a considerable degree of local autonomy, as the British government was embroiled in its own internal conflicts and various European wars. Furthermore, Britain’s West Indian colonies seemed more profitable and of greater significance than those of North America. In these circumstances, local elected assemblies in North America, dominated by the wealthier property-owning settlers, achieved something close to self-government. Colonists came to regard such autonomy as a birthright and part of their English heritage. Thus, until the mid-eighteenth century, almost no one in the colonies thought of breaking away from England because participation in the British Empire provided many advantages — protection in war, access to British markets, and confirmation of the settlers’ identity as “Englishmen” — and few drawbacks.

There were, however, real differences between Englishmen in England and those in the North American colonies. Within the colonies, English settlers had developed societies described by a leading historian as “the most radical in the contemporary Western world.” Certainly class distinctions were real and visible, and a small class of wealthy “gentlemen” — the Adamses, Washingtons, Jeffersons, and Hancocks — wore powdered wigs, imitated the latest European styles, were prominent in political life, and were generally accorded deference by ordinary people. But the ready availability of land following the dispossession of Native Americans, the scarcity of people, and the absence of both a titled nobility and a single established church meant that social life was far more open than in Europe. No legal distinctions differentiated clergy, aristocracy, and commoners, as they did in France. All free men enjoyed the same status before the law, a situation that excluded black slaves and, in some ways, white women as well. These conditions made for less poverty, more economic opportunity, fewer social differences, and easier relationships among the classes than in Europe. The famous economist Adam Smith observed that British colonists were “republican in their manners … and their government” well before their independence from England.3

image pop up. Press enter to access the pop up
Patriots and Loyalists

This English engraving dating from 1775 depicts a club-wielding mob of “Liberty Men” forcing a Virginian loyalist [someone committed to continued British rule] to sign a document, probably endorsing independence for the colonies. The threat of violence toward the loyalist is apparent in the armed crowd, the barrel of tar being used as a table in the foreground, and the sack of feathers hanging from the gallows in the background. Patriots frequently tarred and feathered recalcitrant loyalists during the lead-up to the American Revolution.
 Analyzing Evidence
Based on the image above, how were the American patriots viewed in England?

Thus the American Revolution grew not from social tensions within the colonies, but from a rather sudden and unexpected effort by the British government to tighten its control over the colonies and to extract more revenue from them. As Britain’s global struggle with France drained its treasury and ran up its national debt, British authorities, beginning in the 1760s, looked to America to make good these losses. Abandoning its neglectful oversight of the colonies, Britain began to act like a genuine imperial power, imposing a variety of new taxes and tariffs on the colonies without their consent, for they were not represented in the British Parliament. Many of the colonists were infuriated, because such measures challenged their economic interests, their established traditions of local autonomy, and their identity as true Englishmen. Armed with the ideas of the Enlightenment — popular sovereignty, natural rights, the consent of the governed — they went to war, and by 1781 they had prevailed, with considerable aid from the French, who were only too pleased to harm the interests of their British rivals.

AP® EXAM TIP
Make sure you can connect the American Revolution to broader aspects of global politics.

What was revolutionary about the American experience was not so much the revolution itself but the kind of society that had already emerged within the colonies. Independence from Britain was not accompanied by any wholesale social transformation. Rather, the revolution accelerated the established democratic tendencies of the colonial societies. Political authority remained largely in the hands of the existing elites who had led the revolution, although property requirements for voting were lowered and more white men of modest means, such as small farmers and urban artisans, were elected to state legislatures.

AP® EXAM TIP
Be able to compare the outcomes of the American Revolution with those of later Latin American revolutions.

This widening of political participation gradually eroded the power of traditional gentlemen, but no women or people of color shared in these gains. Land was not seized from its owners, except in the case of pro-British loyalists who had fled the country. Although slavery was gradually abolished in the northern states, where it counted for little, it remained firmly entrenched in the southern states, where it counted for much. Chief Justice John Marshall later gave voice to this conservative understanding of the American Revolution: “All contracts and rights, respecting property, remained unchanged by the Revolution.”4 In the century that followed independence, the United States did become the world’s most democratic country, but this development was less the direct product of the revolution and more the gradual working out in a reformist fashion of earlier practices and the principles of equality announced in the Declaration of Independence.

Nonetheless, many American patriots felt passionately that they were creating “a new order for the ages.” James Madison in the Federalist Papers made the point clearly: “We pursued a new and more noble course … and accomplished a revolution that has no parallel in the annals of human society.” Supporters abroad agreed. On the eve of the French Revolution, a Paris newspaper proclaimed that the United States was “the hope and model of the human race.”5 In both cases, they were referring primarily to the political ideas and practices of the new country. The American Revolution, after all, initiated the political dismantling of Europe’s New World empires. The “right to revolution,” proclaimed in the Declaration of Independence and made effective only in a great struggle, inspired revolutionaries and nationalists from Simón Bolívar in nineteenth-century Latin America to Ho Chi Minh in twentieth-century Vietnam. Moreover, the new U.S. Constitution — with its Bill of Rights, checks and balances, separation of church and state, and federalism — was one of the first sustained efforts to put the political ideas of the Enlightenment into practice. That document, and the ideas that it embraced, echoed repeatedly in the political upheavals of the century that followed.
The French Revolution, 1789–1815
AP® EXAM TIP
Pay attention to these recurring factors in the decline of empires throughout history: government mismanagement and angry lower classes.

Act Two in the drama of the Atlantic revolutions took place in France, beginning in 1789, although it was closely connected to Act One in North America. Thousands of French soldiers had provided assistance to the American colonists and now returned home full of republican enthusiasm. Thomas Jefferson, the U.S. ambassador in Paris, reported that France “has been awakened by our revolution.”6 More immediately, the French government, which had generously aided the Americans in an effort to undermine its British rivals, was teetering on the brink of bankruptcy and had long sought reforms that would modernize the tax system and make it more equitable. In a desperate effort to raise taxes against the opposition of the privileged classes, the French king, Louis XVI, had called into session an ancient representative body, the Estates General. It consisted of male representatives of the three “estates,” or legal orders, of prerevolutionary France: the clergy, the nobility, and the commoners. The first two estates comprised about 2 percent of the population, and the Third Estate included everyone else. When that body convened in 1789, representatives of the Third Estate soon organized themselves as the National Assembly, claiming the sole authority to make laws for the country. A few weeks later, they forthrightly claimed in the Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen that “men are born and remain free and equal in rights,” and this declaration later became the preamble of the 1791 French Constitution. These actions, unprecedented and illegal in the ancien régime (the old regime), launched the French Revolution and radicalized many of the participants in the National Assembly.

 Comparison
How did the French Revolution differ from the American Revolution? How were the two revolutions similar?

 Causation
How did Louis XVI’s desire to keep France solvent contribute to the French Revolution?

The French Revolution was quite different from its North American predecessor. Whereas the American Revolution expressed the tensions of a colonial relationship with a distant imperial power, the French insurrection was driven by sharp conflicts within French society. Members of the titled nobility — privileged, prestigious, and wealthy — resented and resisted the monarchy’s efforts to subject them to new taxes. Educated middle-class men such as doctors, lawyers, lower-level officials, and merchants were growing in numbers and sometimes in wealth and were offended by the remaining privileges of the aristocracy, from which they were excluded. Ordinary urban men and women, many of whose incomes had declined for a generation, were hit particularly hard in the late 1780s by the rapidly rising price of bread and widespread unemployment. Peasants in the countryside, though largely free of serfdom, were subject to hated dues imposed by their landlords, taxes from the state, obligations to the Church, and the requirement to work without pay on public roads. As Enlightenment ideas penetrated French society, more and more people, mostly in the Third Estate but also including some priests and nobles, found a language with which to articulate these grievances. The famous French writer Jean-Jacques Rousseau had told them that it was “manifestly contrary to the law of nature … that a handful of people should gorge themselves with superfluities while the hungry multitude goes in want of necessities.”7

AP® EXAM TIP
Take notes on this violent phase of the French Revolution to compare it with the later Russian and Chinese revolutions of the twentieth century.

These social conflicts gave the French Revolution, especially during its first five years, a much more violent, far-reaching, and radical character than its American counterpart. It was a profound social upheaval, more comparable to the revolutions of Russia and China in the twentieth century than to the earlier American Revolution. Initial efforts to establish a constitutional monarchy and promote harmony among the classes gave way to more radical measures, as internal resistance and foreign opposition produced a fear that the revolution might be overturned. In the process, urban crowds organized insurrections. Some peasants attacked the residences of their lords, burning the documents that recorded their dues and payments. The National Assembly decreed the end of all legal privileges and eliminated what remained of feudalism in France. Even slavery was abolished, albeit briefly. Church lands were sold to raise revenue, and priests were put under government authority.

In 1793, King Louis XVI and his queen, Marie Antoinette, were executed, an act of regicide that shocked traditionalists all across Europe and marked a new stage in revolutionary violence. What followed was the Terror of 1793–1794. Under the leadership of Maximilien Robespierre (ROHBS-pee-air) and his Committee of Public Safety, tens of thousands deemed enemies of the revolution lost their lives on the guillotine. Shortly thereafter, Robespierre himself was arrested and guillotined, accused of leading France into tyranny and dictatorship. “The revolution,” remarked one of its victims, “was devouring its own children.”

Accompanying attacks on the old order were efforts to create a wholly new society, symbolized by a new calendar with the Year 1 in 1792, marking a fresh start for France. Unlike the Americans, who sought to restore or build on earlier freedoms, French revolutionaries perceived themselves to be starting from scratch and looked to the future. For the first time in its history, the country became a republic and briefly passed universal male suffrage, although it was never implemented. The old administrative system was rationalized into eighty-three territorial departments, each with a new name. As revolutionary France prepared for war against its threatened and threatening neighbors, it created the world’s largest army, with some 800,000 men, and all adult males were required to serve. Led by officers from the middle and even lower classes, this was an army of citizens representing the nation.

image pop up. Press enter to access the pop up
The Execution of Robespierre

The beheading of the radical leader Robespierre, who had himself brought thousands of others to the guillotine, marked a decisive turning point in the unfolding of the French Revolution and the end of its most violent phase.
 Contextualization
How would the mass executions of the Terror have impacted the way that people outside of France interpreted the French Revolution?

In terms of gender roles, the French Revolution did not create a new society, but it did raise the question of female political equality far more explicitly than the American Revolution had done. Partly this was because French women were active in the major events of the revolution. In July 1789, they took part in the famous storming of the Bastille, a large fortress, prison, and armory that had come to symbolize the oppressive old regime. In October of that year, some 7,000 Parisian women, desperate about the shortage of bread, marched on the palace at Versailles, stormed through the royal apartments searching for the despised Queen Marie Antoinette, and forced the royal family to return with them to Paris.

AP® EXAM TIP
The growing demands for women’s rights that grew out of the Atlantic revolutions are important information for the AP® exam.

Backed by a few male supporters, women also made serious political demands. They signed petitions detailing their complaints: lack of education, male competition in female trades, the prevalence of prostitution, the rapidly rising price of bread and soap. One petition, reflecting the intersection of class and gender, referred to women as the “Third Estate of the Third Estate.” Another demanded the right to bear arms in defense of the revolution. Over sixty women’s clubs were established throughout the country. A small group called the Cercle Social (Social Circle) campaigned for women’s rights, noting that “the laws favor men at the expense of women, because everywhere power is in your hands.”8 The French playwright and journalist Olympe de Gouges appropriated the language of the Declaration of Rights to insist that “woman is born free and lives equal to man in her rights.”

But the assertion of French women in the early years of the revolution seemed wildly inappropriate and threatening to most men, uniting conservatives and revolutionaries alike in defense of male privileges. And so in late 1793, the country’s all-male legislative body voted to ban all women’s clubs. “Women are ill-suited for elevated thoughts and serious meditation,” declared one of the male representatives. “A woman should not leave her family to meddle in affairs of government.” Here was a conception of gender that defined masculinity in terms of exercising political power. Women who aspired to do so were, in the words of one revolutionary orator, “denatured viragos” (unnatural domineering women), in short, not really women at all.9 Thus French revolutionaries were distinctly unwilling to offer any political rights to women, even though they had eliminated class restrictions, at least in theory; granted religious freedom to Jews and Protestants; and abolished slavery. Nonetheless, according to a leading historian, “the French Revolution, more than any other event of its time, opened up the question of women’s rights for consideration” and thus laid the foundations for modern feminism.10

 Causation
What caused the French Revolution to become much more radical than the American Revolution?

If not in terms of gender, the immediate impact of the revolution was felt in many other ways. Streets got new names; monuments to the royal family were destroyed; titles vanished; people referred to one another as “citizen so-and-so.” Real politics in the public sphere emerged for the first time as many people joined political clubs, took part in marches and demonstrations, served on local committees, and ran for public office. Ordinary men and women, who had identified primarily with their local communities, now began to think of themselves as belonging to a nation. The state replaced the Catholic Church as the place for registering births, marriages, and deaths, and revolutionary festivals substituted for church holidays.

More radical revolutionary leaders deliberately sought to convey a sense of new beginnings and endless possibilities. At a Festival of Unity held in 1793 to mark the first anniversary of the end of monarchy, participants burned the crowns and scepters of the royal family in a huge bonfire while releasing a cloud of 3,000 white doves. The Cathedral of Notre Dame was temporarily turned into the Temple of Reason, while a “Hymn to Liberty” combined traditional church music with the explicit message of the Enlightenment:

Oh Liberty, sacred Liberty / Goddess of an enlightened people

Rule today within these walls. / Through you this temple is purified.

Liberty! Before you reason chases out deception, / Error flees, fanaticism is beaten down.

Our gospel is nature / And our cult is virtue.

To love one’s country and one’s brothers, / To serve the Sovereign People

These are the sacred tenets / And pledge of a Republican.11

Elsewhere too the French Revolution evoked images of starting over. Witnessing that revolution in 1790, the young William Wordsworth, later a famous British Romantic poet, imagined “human nature seeming born again.” “Bliss it was in that dawn to be alive,” he wrote. “But to be young was very heaven.”

The French Revolution also differed from the American Revolution in the way its influence spread. At least until the United States became a world power at the end of the nineteenth century, what inspired others was primarily the example of its revolution and its constitution. French influence, by contrast, spread through conquest, largely under the leadership of Napoleon Bonaparte (r. 1799–1815). A highly successful general who seized power in 1799, Napoleon is often credited with taming the revolution in the face of growing disenchantment with its more radical features and with the social conflicts it generated. He preserved many of its more moderate elements, such as civil equality, a secular law code, religious freedom, and promotion by merit, while reconciling with the Catholic Church and suppressing the revolution’s more democratic elements in a military dictatorship. In short, Napoleon kept the revolution’s emphasis on social equality for men but dispensed with liberty.

AP® EXAM TIP
If you haven’t already done so, now is a good time to make a chart of political, economic, and social similarities and differences between the French and American revolutions.

Like many of the revolution’s ardent supporters, Napoleon was intent on spreading its benefits far and wide. In a series of brilliant military campaigns, his forces subdued most of Europe, thus creating the continent’s largest empire since the days of the Romans (see Map 8.2). Within that empire, Napoleon imposed such revolutionary practices as ending feudalism, proclaiming equality of rights, insisting on religious toleration, codifying the laws, and rationalizing government administration. In many places, these reforms were welcomed, and seeds of further change were planted. But French domination was also resented and resisted, stimulating national consciousness throughout Europe. That too was a seed that bore fruit in the century that followed. More immediately, national resistance, particularly from Russia and Britain, brought down Napoleon and his amazing empire by 1815 and marked an end to the era of the French Revolution, though not to the potency of its ideas.

image pop up. Press enter to access the pop up
Map 8.2 Napoleon’s European Empire

The French Revolution spawned a French Empire, under Napoleon’s leadership, that encompassed most of Europe and served to spread the principles of the revolution.

French Empire: France (Paris, Rome, Elba) and Illyrian Provinces.

Allied with Napoleon: Austrian Empire (Vienna), Prussia (Tilsit), and Kingdom of Norway and Denmark.

Dependent States: Spain, Kingdom of Naples (Naplee), Kingdom of Italy, Switzerland, Confederation of the Rhine, Westphalia, and Saxony.

At war with Napoleon: Great Britain (London) and Russian Empire (Moscow and St. Petersburg).

Battle sites: Trafalgar, 1805; Waterloo, 1813; Leipzig, 1813; Borodino, 1812.

 Causation
Based on the evidence in this map, how did the rise of Napoleon facilitate the spread of Enlightenment ideals across the European continent?
